Source A

After the defeat of the Lancastrians in 1471, Edward’s power in the kingdom was reaffirmed. The Queen remembered the insults to her family, namely that she was not the legitimate wife of the King. Thus she concluded that her offspring by the King would never come to the throne unless the Duke of Clarence was removed; and of this she easily persuaded the King. The Queen’s alarm was intensified by the attractiveness of the Duke of Clarence, which would make him appear worthy of the Crown; besides he possessed such mastery of public speaking that nothing on which he set his heart seemed difficult to achieve. Accordingly, whether the charge was fabricated or a real plot revealed, the Duke of Clarence was accused of conspiring the King’s death by means of spells and magicians. When the charge had been considered before a court, he was condemned and put to death.

From an account by Dominic Mancini, an Italian cleric who visited London from 1482 to 1483. He used informants to assist him and wrote his account whilst in France shortly after Richard of Gloucester seized power.

Source B

Following the death of Charles, Duke of Burgundy, his widow the Duchess, Lady Margaret, who was fonder of her brother Clarence than any other in her family, devoted all her effort to uniting in marriage Mary, heiress of Charles, and Clarence whose wife had recently died. So exalted a destiny for an ungrateful brother displeased the King who, therefore, threw all possible obstacles in the way of such a marriage. Now each began to look upon the other with unbrotherly eyes. A squire in the Duke’s household was accused of participating in witchcraft and was condemned to death. The Duke of Clarence came to the council at Westminster with a famous Franciscan preacher, read out a declaration of innocence and then withdrew. The King was greatly displeased, summoned the Duke and forcefully protested against the Duke's conduct, as if he were in contempt of the law of the land and a great threat to the kingdom.

From ‘Crowland Chronicle: Second Continuation’, an account of the years 1459 to 1486. It was most likely written in 1486. The writer’s identity is disputed but he was close to Edward IV and his council.

Source C

Despite the King’s professed love for Clarence, shown by the large grants he has given him and his forgiving of past offences, the Duke’s love has not increased but rather grows more daily malicious, and he has not been slow to conspire more treasons. Indeed he has falsely and traitorously intended and purposed the destruction and disinheriting of the King and his issue and the subversion of all rule of the realm. The Duke, fully intending to exalt himself and his heirs to the Crown of England, has falsely and untruly rumoured, published and said that the King, our sovereign lord, was a bastard and not born to reign over us. He had obtained an agreement under the seal of Henry VI with Margaret, calling herself Queen, that if Henry and Edward, his first born son, died without male issue, then he and his heirs should be kings of this land and the Duke had kept this secret.

From the Rolls of Parliament, the official parliamentary record, presenting the charges and accusations made against George, Duke of Clarence, in 1478.

Using your understanding of the historical context, assess the value of these three sources to an historian studying the reasons why George, Duke of Clarence, was executed in 1478.