Extract A

Imperialism lays burdens, both economic and political, on the homeland of the conquerors, and its rewards are often more imaginary than real. Many Spaniards made fortunes in the Indies which they could scarcely have dreamed of in Spain – but the steady drift overseas of men of courage and ability was a serious loss to Spain. The silver of the Indies, the most valuable prize of empire, which paid the armies of Italy and Flanders, in the end created more problems than it solved. The great increase in the amount of silver in circulation in Spain, and in due course throughout Europe, and the consequent inflation of commodity prices, caused great confusion and great hardship. Since the rigidity of the Castilian economy made it impossible for industry and agriculture to respond adequately to the stimulus of rising prices, the result was to place Spain at a serious disadvantage in international trade.

Adapted from J H Parry, The Age of Reconnaissance, 1966

Extract B

Above all, the empire meant wealth. From the royal levy of one-fifth on precious metals, the Crown had an income over which its authority was complete. The very possession of an income in ready cash was a considerable asset, increasing Spain’s already formidable reputation and providing security for massive loans. Indeed by the end of the reign of Philip II, with Castile’s taxable potential exhausted, it was only American silver that staved off financial disaster. Whatever else it did for Spain is less certain. The influx of American silver was once thought to have driven up Castilian prices and eventually ruined the country. But prices and wages in Spain had already doubled by the mid-1500s, when silver imports were negligible. By the late sixteenth century, prices and wages were rising more slowly, whereas bullion imports into Seville reached a peak after 1580. Rarely, if ever, and then only at Seville, was there a sufficient concentration of American silver to inflate prices.

Adapted from G V Scammell, The World Encompassed: The First European Maritime Empires, c800–1650, 1981

Extract C

The situation Philip II inherited in 1556 was alarming. Charles V left him a Spanish revenue of less than two million ducats a year, and a debt of twenty million ducats. In 1557 and again in 1575, Philip was forced to declare bankruptcy. Yet the last thirty years of his reign were filled with wars against the Moors, the Turks, the Dutch, the French, and the English. Philip seems to have supposed that American silver would pay for all these wars. Actually, American silver was never his main source of income. By the 1580s he was receiving two million ducats in every treasure fleet, but this was a small sum compared with the six million ducats annually extracted from the Castilian peasantry. Thanks to his extortionate tax policy, the Prudent King managed to keep ahead of the price inflation. But he still failed to meet the skyrocketing costs of war.

Adapted from Richard S Dunn, The Age of Religious Wars, 1559–1689, 1971

Using your understanding of the historical context, assess how convincing the arguments in these three extracts are in relation to the importance of American silver from the Indies for Spain.