Source A

King Edward landed with 1500 English troops and ships provided by Charles, Duke of Burgundy. He passed through the city of York, where Edward called himself no more than duke, as his father’s heir, because it was necessary to disguise his intentions on account of his enemies there. He arrived without meeting any resistance before the city of Coventry in which the Earls of Warwick and Oxford had shut themselves together with a great body of troops. In the meantime the Duke of Clarence, King Edward’s brother, had been quietly reconciled to him by the mediation of his sisters, the Duchesses of Burgundy and Exeter. The number of royal forces increased daily so much so that the earls in Coventry did not dare either to challenge the King to fight or take up his challenge to them on the battlefield. The King therefore proceeded to London where he once more took King Henry prisoner and also George, Archbishop of York, then chancellor of the realm.

From the ‘Crowland Chronicle: Second Continuation’, an account of the years 1459 to 1486. It was most likely written in 1486. The writer’s identity is disputed but he was close to Edward IV and his council.

Source B

In London provision was made to keep King Edward out. King Henry was conveyed through the city by the Archbishop of York who held him by the hand all the way. But it was more like a play than the showing of a prince to win men’s hearts, and he lost many supporters. The archbishop, lacking confidence that the citizens of London would resist King Edward, left King Henry alone, and the rest of any reputation did likewise. The Dukes of Clarence and Exeter, with the Earls of Warwick and Oxford, whose force was reported far higher than King Edward’s, came to St Albans and then moved towards Barnet. King Edward on the same day rode with great pomp through London, and King Henry was conveyed secretly to him. He made his way to Barnet and lodged in the town. In this night the Duke of Clarence, contrary to his honour and oath, departed secretly from the Earl of Warwick and the other lords, with his retinue, to King Edward.

From the ‘Great Chronicle of London’ accredited to Robert Fabian, written between 1500 and 1509. Fabian lived in London in 1471 and was later a prominent London alderman.

Source C

King Edward took to the sea; arrived in England; and, by force and bravery, reduced and reconquered the realm. He fought against the Earl of Warwick and his accomplices. Warwick had called himself Lieutenant of England, by pretending authority from the usurper Henry. Also King Edward acted against Henry and Henry's son, Edward, calling himself Prince of Wales, who were wrongly occupying the realm and Crown of England, and also against many other powerful lords. At Barnet, Edward IV, trusting in God’s help, showed great courage in suppressing the falsehood and treachery of those who had conspired against him. He manfully, vigorously and valiantly assailed them in the midst of the strongest sector of their army, so that he won the field at Barnet. Afterwards Queen Margaret, with her son Edward, called Prince of Wales, assembled great people and, after their arrival in the west country, came to Tewkesbury, where King Edward gave battle. At Tewkesbury Edward, called Prince, was taken, fleeing towards the town and slain in the field.

From the ‘Arrival of Edward IV’, an official Yorkist account written by a contemporary servant of Edward IV, regarding his return to England in 1471 and intended for circulation in England and abroad.

With reference to these sources and your understanding of the historical context, assess the value of these three sources to an historian studying the reasons why Edward IV was able to recover the throne in 1471.