Extract A

Philip II was the perfect master in the art of ruling. He sought to prevent the Crown becoming the tool of the powerful factions. He was capable, like any self-respecting monarch, of direct intervention. He had Baron de Montigny, the envoy of the rebel Dutch leaders, Egmont and Hornes, secretly executed in October 1570 in the castle of Simancas. Philip II decided it was better to strangle him quietly to avoid further unrest which his execution might provoke, as the public executions of Egmont and Hornes would do. Philip wrote: “Everyone must believe he had died of illness and this must be given out by letters”. This kind of mentality Philip shared with other monarchs of the time. One of the features of his character was a high sense of justice; he believed that his sovereignty gave him the right to execute private and secret justice beyond any authority except God’s.

Adapted from John Lynch, Spain 1516–1598. From Nation State to World Empire, 1994

Extract B

Philip exercised a good deal less than total control. Theoretically his power was unlimited. Yet, despite the image of an absolute king resisting factions led by the Prince of Eboli and the Duke of Alba, Philip did nothing but, at best, approve plans already made. Equally both indecisive and timid, he was responsible for decisions with disastrous consequences: Alba’s policies in the Netherlands, the plans chosen for the Armada and the orders given to Parma which, when on the verge of victory, left him stripped of his armies. In Spain, effective government rested on the co-operation of local nobles, town guilds and traditional landowners. Philip, far from ruling directly, saw the Crown’s resources so strained that its centralist policies collapsed, with power passing to the local regional governments. Philip struggled to rule the many kingdoms of the peninsula. He was often forced to accept conditions, such as respecting traditional rights in Aragon and Portugal. In Valencia just 73 out of 300 towns were under royal control.

Adapted from Geoffrey Woodward, Philip II, 1999

Extract C

As Spain’s papal nuncio complained in 1587, “His Majesty wants to see and do everything himself; but that is impossible, even if he had ten hands and heads”. Religious faith played an important part in preventing Philip from achieving his goals. Equally, he was unable to distinguish between those affairs that he should deal with himself and those he could not avoid delegating to others. This combination undermined Philip’s ability to deal with the many problems that confronted the ruler of fifty million subjects in a global monarchy, almost constantly at war. The attempted micro-management of the empire defined the nature of Philip’s rule. No one could excel in both minutely overseeing the construction of the Escorial Palace and additionally be a world statesman. The very skill sets that equipped Philip so superbly for the first task fatally compromised his ability to succeed at the second, as ruler of a global empire.

Adapted from Geoffrey Parker, Imprudent King: A New Life of Philip II, 2014

Using your understanding of the historical context, assess how convincing the arguments in these three extracts are in relation to Philip II as a ruler.