Source A

The commons have been greatly charged with taxes, to their great impoverishment and with little good to the King or the country. With regard to most of these taxes, the King has not retained half for himself. The other part has been taken for their own use by other lords and persons who are enemies to the common good. They have allowed all of the possessions which the King held in France and Normandy, which were won by his most noble father, to be shamefully lost or sold. The Earls of Shrewsbury and Wiltshire and the Lord Beaumont, our mortal enemies both now and for a long time past, have been guiding the King. The supporters of those lords would not allow the King to receive and accept us into his presence as he would have done if he had his own will. They are the cause of all of this and not the noble King.

From the ‘Yorkist Manifesto’, issued by the Yorkist lords before their invasion from Calais in 1460.

Source B

In September 1460, the Duke of York came out of Ireland. He journeyed towards London, gave banners with the arms of England to trumpeters and, commanding his sword be borne upright before him, rode to King Henry’s palace at Westminster, and there claimed the Crown of England. He kept King Henry there by force and strength until, at last, the King, for fear of death, granted him the Crown. However, the lords asked earnestly that King Henry should retain the Crown during his life, the Crown returning to the Duke’s heirs after his death. They thereupon swore to be faithful and true to King Henry; also that it should be treason to speak any evil of the Duke of York, his wife or his children. All the lords agreed to this, and so it was proclaimed in London and many places in England. Also it was decreed that the Duke should receive from the Crown yearly, for his expenses and those of his heirs during King Henry’s life, 10,000 marks.

From ‘Gregory’s Chronicle’, a predominantly London-focused account, dealing with major political events and written in the 1460s. The exact authorship is much disputed by historians.

Source C

On arrival in London in October 1460, the Duke of York rode straight to the palace, at which the people were greatly taken aback. He went to lodge in the royal chamber and the King was placed in the custody of six of the Duke’s men. The Earl of Salisbury, after observing this, went to his son, the Earl of Warwick, and recounted to him the Duke of York’s actions. The Earl of Warwick became very angry and said he would go to the Duke of York himself. He went to the palace which he found full of armed men. When he saw this, he doubted whether the Duke of York intended to come to an understanding with him. When the Duke saw him, there were angry words between them, for the Earl disclosed to the Duke how the lords and people were unhappy at his desire to strip the King of the Crown. During these exchanges the Earl of Rutland backed his father against the Earl of Warwick.

From an account by Jean de Waurin, a Burgundian historian and diplomat. He first visited England in 1467 and wrote in 1471.

With reference to these sources and your understanding of the historical context, assess the value of these three sources to an historian studying the aims of the Yorkists in 1460.