Extract A

In ruling the Netherlands, Philip II was short-sighted, unbending and hated in contrast to his father Charles, who was wise, loved and popular. Philip lacked the qualities which made Charles’ rule acceptable. Importantly, Philip was a foreigner who spoke only Castilian. After the transfer of power in 1559 he never returned to the Netherlands. Yet Philip essentially followed the policies of his father, inheriting the many problems which would later lead to rebellion. Religious and political discontent existed. Finances had suffered because of Charles’ need for more money. Philip tried to win over the nobility by offering greater rewards than Charles had done, yet they remained in opposition to him challenging his authority and honour. This was further complicated by the spread of Protestantism within the Netherlands. Philip, in his war on Calvinism, again followed his father’s policy of repression. Philip similarly revived his father’s unpopular scheme for new bishoprics designed to remove foreign authority and prevent the spread of Protestantism.

Adapted from P Geyl, The Revolt of the Netherlands, 1970

Extract B

Whilst Spanish policy in the Netherlands was repressive it was nevertheless undermined by the determination and the skills of the Dutch leadership: William of Orange and later Maurice of Nassau and their Calvinist supporters. There were other factors which favoured the rebels and contributed to the failure of Spanish policy. The geography of the region assisted the Dutch, allowing whole areas to be flooded in the low-lying regions. The military engineering of the Dutch, the inspirational leadership of Maurice after 1584 and the intervention of the English diverted Spanish resources especially in 1588. The defeat of the Armada sustained the Dutch belief in their ability to defeat the Spanish. Spanish financial weakness, a consequence of their overstretched resources especially against the English and French, meant Philip had to divide his attention to meet his many commitments. Parma was strategically prevented, both in 1580 in the invasion of Portugal, and in the Armada of 1588, from taking full advantage of his opportunities to defeat the rebels in the North Netherlands.

Adapted from M Rady, Revolt to Independence. The Netherlands 1550–1650, 1995

Extract C

King Philip II bears the greatest responsibility for the failure of Spanish policy in the Netherlands. He consistently failed to understand that the imposition of his policies undermined traditional liberties and laid the foundations for conflict with his Dutch subjects, in the Netherlands, especially with the appointment of the military governor, the Duke of Alba, whose excesses in the Netherlands provoked widespread violence. Philip’s religious beliefs contributed significantly to the failure of Spanish policy in the Netherlands. Philip’s commitment to the Catholic cause led to the breach with Spain’s oldest ally, England. Philip believed he was God’s lieutenant on earth. This drove his strategic thinking in the Netherlands. The Bishopric Question led to considerable opposition, alienating potential allies and preventing any compromise with England. Philip embarked upon a policy of confrontation leading to an eighty-year war with the Netherlands and a twenty-year war with England, both a consequence of Philip’s imperfect understanding of his authority.

Adapted from G Parker, The Grand Strategy of Philip II, 1998

Using your understanding of the historical context, assess how convincing the arguments in these three extracts are in relation to Philip II’s responsibility for the failure of Spanish policy in the Netherlands in the years 1556 to 1598.