Source A

To our trusty and well beloved Mayor, his brethren and community of our city of York.
Trusty and well beloved, we greet you well. We have arrived, not only by God’s grace, but also for the relief of our country, so that you and all other true subjects who have been greatly injured and oppressed, with a lack of good rules and justice, can be saved. Therefore we pray that you will show unto us your good support and favours.

And we are exhausted and laboured, as we have travelled far by sea and upon land with such power as we have brought with us. We look to you, that we may have relief and ease of lodging and vital resources within our city. And in your doing so, you shall be doing things that are good and right and will support your good and sovereign lord at all times hereafter.

From a letter written by the Earl of Lincoln and Viscount Lovell, organisers of the Lambert Simnel rebellion, to the city of York, 8 June 1487.

Source B

The Pope expressed his disgust for those disturbing the peace in England and the rebels against Henry, King of England and Lord of Ireland. The Pope had recently learned that Octavian and Walter, archbishops of Armagh and Dublin, John, bishop of Meath, and the present bishop of Kildare, in contempt of His Holiness’ orders, supported and aided and abetted the enemies and rebels. Furthermore, the named bishops and archbishops set up and crowned as king a boy of illegitimate birth, Lambert Simnel. They falsely alleged him to be a son of the late Duke of Clarence, whom King Henry already had in his hands, thereby committing treason. The Pope, therefore, ordered the above-named bishops to respond to these charges without any delay. With the advice from his cardinals, the Pope may proceed against the said archbishops and bishops. The Pope appointed cardinals to act with his full authority in this matter.

From an official proclamation by Pope Innocent VIII, to all bishops, 5 January 1488, recorded in the Vatican Register.

Source C

John, Earl of Lincoln and Francis Lovell arrived at Dublin, having received from Margaret an army of about 2000 Germans under the command of Martin Schwartz, a high-born German outstanding for his skill in war. They treated Lambert Simnel just as if he were born of royal blood and deserving of being crowned king in the traditional way. After this, having scraped together a multitude of impoverished and all but unarmed Irishmen, they sailed to England with the new king. They were relying on the assistance of Thomas Broughton, the leading conspirator. But King Henry, who was not slow to react and had anticipated this, had dispatched cavalry both to keep watch for his enemies’ arrival and also to arrest certain men coming from Ireland so he might learn his enemies’ plans. King Henry assembled his forces and went to Coventry. However, the King had scarcely arrived there when the cavalrymen reported that the Earl, his hastily assembled army and the boy, Simnel, had landed on the Lancashire coast.

From ‘English History’ written by Polydore Vergil, c1513. Vergil was a highly respected Italian cleric and Tudor historian.

With reference to these sources and your understanding of the historical context, assess the value of these three sources to an historian studying the threat from the Simnel Rebellion.