Extract A

Spain suffered war on many fronts: the Mediterranean and the Netherlands, and in 1585 England and France. Spain was the only country in the sixteenth century capable of sustaining such an effort at considerable cost. In the Mediterranean against the Turks, Spain was fighting for survival; against Dutch rebels in the Netherlands in defence of Philip’s Habsburg inheritance; in the Atlantic and the Caribbean, protecting Spain’s colonial and economic interests. The war against France was defensive but increasingly involved both England and the Netherlands.

Spain’s greatest problem however, was the American empire. Spain and its empire had become over-extended, its vulnerability increasingly demanded defence against Spain’s enemies. The costs undermined the domestic economy with disastrous social consequences. Defeats were a marked feature of the years after 1586. The loss of the North Netherlands, failure to defeat England in 1588 and, in the early 1590s, disastrous involvement in the French religious wars and the financial burden of a vast global empire, limited the extent of Spain’s power.

Adapted from J Lynch, Spain, 1516–1598, 1992

Extract B

To most Spaniards in 1598, Spain was powerful. Philip had defeated the Turks and forced their withdrawal from the Mediterranean. Philip was able to secure full unification of Spain by the annexation of Portugal in 1580, a political and strategic masterstroke, which added another large colonial empire. Peace with France was an honourable end to a long-running, expensive war. Although the Armada had failed, England was unable to take advantage of this defeat. Whilst the North Netherlands remained in revolt, the southern states of the Netherlands remained firmly under Spanish control.

Spain was able to extend its global empire into the Pacific without interference. The massive influx of silver made Spain the wealthiest power in the world. Continued expansion created the largest global empire. Philip had defended his empire and the Catholic Church throughout the New World. This was indeed an empire on which the sun never set. There is no evidence when Philip lay on his deathbed, that Spanish power was anything other than a reality.

Adapted from G Woodward, Philip II, 1992

Extract C

By 1598, Spain was strategically overstretched. Spanish resources were exhausted. Philip needed to withdraw from costly wars, eventually realising peace was needed to deal with the inherited and increasingly fragmented nature of his empire. Portugal, whilst it gave Spain a huge overseas empire, proved an administrative and financial drain. The geographical spread of Spain’s territories created communication difficulties.

Yet, Philip saw war as a religious struggle, fought through God’s will. Spain dominated the Catholic world. Jesuits and priests drove the Counter-Reformation both in Europe and the New World. By the 1590s, Spain oversaw a vast Catholic empire. Orthodoxy had been preserved in the South Netherlands, France had become Catholic, and the Iberian Peninsula had rid itself of heresy. The Castilian economy, whilst cracking under the continuing strain of constant war, maintained its wealthy international position. American silver, which had financed Philip’s expansion of empire, was still returning vast revenues in the last years of Philip’s reign.

Adapted from G Parker, The Grand Strategy of Philip II, 1998

Using your understanding of the historical context, assess how convincing the arguments in these three extracts are in relation to Spain’s international position in the reign of Philip II.