Source A

I, Richard by Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Prince of Wales; to all those who will see or read this present letter, greetings.

It has pleased God, who puts down the mighty and promotes the humble and who does not allow the hopes of the just to perish, to give me means to show myself armed to my lords and people of England. My mortal enemy, Henry Tudor, a false usurper of the crown of England, knows in his heart my undoubted right to the throne; I being the very Richard, Duke of York, younger and now surviving heir of the noble and victorious Edward IV, late King of England. This Tudor, my mortal enemy, in accordance with the meanness of his birth, has trodden underfoot the honour of this nation. He has profited from the estates and fortunes of my peers and subjects, only to enrich his coffers.

From the proclamation of Perkin Warbeck claiming to be Richard, King of England. This was issued when the Scottish forces crossed the River Tweed, 1496.

Source B

Your letter of congratulation, dated 17 July, on the victories gained by King Henry VII, has arrived. One victory was against the King of Scotland, supporter of the pretender, Perkin Warbeck, who claims to be the son of King Edward. In this, the King of Scotland retreated not very gloriously. Something I have learnt, which His Majesty did not tell me, is that the youth, Perkin, has fled disguised and his wife is said to be a prisoner. It seems that this youth has vanished into smoke.

Even if the marriage of Prince Arthur and Catherine of Aragon is not solemnised, I consider this kingdom is perfectly stable. This is firstly by reason of the King’s wisdom, whereof everyone stands in awe, and secondly, on account of the King’s wealth. I am informed that King Henry has upwards of six millions in gold, and it is said that he puts by annually more than 500 000 ducats, which makes him secure.

From a letter to the Duke of Milan, from Raimondo de Raimondi, his ambassador in England, 8 September 1497. De Raimondi had visited Henry VII at Woodstock, in August.

Source C

King Henry VII was very disturbed that William Stanley had a share in this Warbeck conspiracy, because Stanley was his chamberlain, entrusted with all his affairs. He ordered William to be arrested and questioned. William denied nothing, but frankly confessed his guilt, if he had offended in any way. And they say his offence was this; when William and Robert Clifford were having a conversation concerning this Perkin, who falsely claimed to be Edward’s son, William announced he would never take up arms against Warbeck, if he knew for certain that he was indeed the son of Edward. The King was doubtful what he should decide about William; for he feared that by punishing the man he would offend William’s father, Thomas Stanley. On the other hand, if he forgave the insult, he was afraid others would attempt worse things, made bolder by that act of leniency. Therefore in the end he decided that severity should prevail, and so William was condemned of a capital crime and put to death.

From ‘English History’, by Polydore Vergil, c1513. Vergil was a highly respected Italian cleric and Tudor historian.

With reference to these sources and your understanding of the historical context, assess the value of these three sources to an historian studying Perkin Warbeck’s threat to Henry VII.