Extract A

Philip II faced serious challenges to his authority from various parts of his empire. This opposition took a variety of forms. Although Castile was the foundation of Philip’s power, the Castilian Cortes frequently challenged his demands for taxation and, as the reign progressed, also challenged his imperial policies. This had a significant impact on his ability to rule effectively. Elsewhere opposition took an even more serious form. Rioting and protests against taxation disrupted government in most corners of the Empire. He faced more of this significant opposition in Spain itself; the Morisco Revolt in 1568 and the Aragonese Revolt of 1590/91 shook the King’s authority to its core, revealing the weak grip he had over his non-Castilian subjects. However, the most serious and exhausting challenge to Philip’s rule took place in the Netherlands, where rebellion dragged Spain into a bitter and prolonged conflict that resulted in defeat and financial ruin.

Adapted from D McKinnon-Bell, Philip II, 2001

Extract B

Despite his physical distance from his people, Philip suffered only two serious uprisings against him in Spain. Trouble in Granada flared when laws dating back to the 1520s, which prohibited Moorish customs, dress and laws, were finally put into force in 1567. The rebellion that resulted was not completely quelled until November 1570, but the delayed arrival of royal troops led by Don John ensured a swift and decisive victory against the beleaguered Morisco forces. The authority of the Crown had never been in doubt during the rebellion. After this point, the Morisco population was firmly suppressed and would never again pose a threat to Philip’s rule. In Aragon, the presence of the fugitive ex-royal secretary Perez sparked a rebellion by unruly nobles, which required military intervention. However, the loyalty of Aragon’s leading aristocratic families helped ensure a rapid and complete royal victory in 1592. As a result, Aragon lost much of its autonomy, and Philip’s absolutism was confirmed.

Adapted from J Hunt, Spain 1474–1598, 2001

Extract C

Extract C not reproduced here due to third party copyright restrictions.

Using your understanding of the historical context, assess how convincing the arguments in these three extracts are in relation to opposition faced by Philip II in the years 1568 to 1598.