Source A

To my beloved cousin, John Paston, let this letter be delivered in haste.

The Duke of Somerset, the Earl of Northumberland and the Lord Clifford are all dead. As for any other Lords, many of them are hurt.
And as for any great multitude of people that there was, there was slain, at most, 120.
And as for the Lords that were with the King, they and their men had all their harnesses and horses taken; and as for what rule we shall have I do not know, save only there be made new certain officers.

My Lord of York, Constable of England; my Lord of Warwick is made Captain of Calais; my Lord Bouchier is made Treasurer of England; but as yet I have no other news. And as for our Sovereign Lord the King, thanks be to God, he did not come to great harm.

Written in London, on Whitsunday.
By your cousin,
John Crane

From a private letter sent to John Paston, a prominent Norfolk gentleman, by his cousin, John Crane in London, 25 May 1455.

Source B

I learned here yesterday, by letters which came straight from Sandwich to Dunkirk, that fresh disturbances broke out in England a few days after my departure. A great part of the nobles have been in conflict, and the Duke of Somerset, the Earl of Northumberland and my Lord Clifford are slain, with many other lords and knights on both sides. The Duke of Somerset’s son was mortally wounded; my Lord Buckingham and his son are hurt. The Duke of York has done this, with his followers. On the 24 May he entered London and made a solemn procession to St Paul’s. They say he has demanded pardon from the King for himself and his men, and will have it. He will take up the government again, and some think that the affairs of that kingdom will now take a turn for the better. If that be the case, we can put up with this inconvenience.

From a letter sent to the Italian Archbishop of Ravenna from an Italian bishop, who had recently left England and was in Bruges in the Netherlands, summer 1455.

Source C

The King firmly ordered this parliament to be assembled for the more rapid resolution of the business of the Battle of St Albans and so that justice might be carried out more swiftly for those wishing to complain. One reason for the summoning of parliament is to establish perfect love and peace among the lords of this land, so that they may come together in one union and accord.

The King desires and grants, by the advice of the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present parliament assembled, that our said cousins, and all those accompanying them, should be believed. Our said cousins, the Duke of York, the Earl of Warwick and the Earl of Salisbury, their heirs and their followers should not be impeached, sued, vexed, grieved, harmed or molested in their bodies, lands or goods in any way for anything supposed or alleged to have been done to or against the Crown or royal dignity on the twenty-second day at St Albans.

From the Parliamentary Roll of July 1455. This was known as the Parliament of Reconciliation. Parliamentary Rolls are the official records of the English Parliament.

With reference to these sources and your understanding of the historical context, assess the value of these three sources to an historian studying the First Battle of St Albans.