Source A

Trusty and well beloved,
We greet you well. I write to let you know that the Duke of Buckingham has become a traitor and turned upon us. This is contrary to the duty of the Duke’s allegiance and office. The Duke of Buckingham intends the utter destruction of us. That includes you and all other true and loyal subjects that have taken our part in establishing this reign. With God’s grace we are resolved to resist and subdue Buckingham’s traitorous intent. We desire and pray that you will send us many men armed and on horseback. Send as many as you can. Send the men to our town of Leicester. The men must arrive on the 21st of this month without fail. If you will protect our honour, we will see you are paid and rewarded for your support. This will give further confidence to our trusty supporters.
Given under our signet at the city of Lincoln on the 11th day of October.

From a letter to the citizens of York from Richard III, 1483. Richard III was in Lincoln when he wrote this letter.

Source B

The occasion whereupon the King and Duke fell out, which led to Buckingham’s conspiracy, is disputed. After Richard’s coronation they parted, seemingly, great friends. Yet when the Duke came home, he so easily turned and so highly conspired against the King, that a man would marvel at this change.

Some say that Buckingham told Richard he required the Duke of Hereford’s lands, of which he pretended himself to be the rightful inheritor. Richard rejected this with spiteful and threatening words; which wounded Buckingham’s heart with hatred and mistrust. Consequently, the Duke could never support Richard and feared for his life. Yet many wise men think this story unlikely. The truth is the Duke was a proud man and could not bear another’s glory. Some say, that as soon as the crown was set on Richard’s head, Buckingham could not bear it. The cunning Bishop of Ely, who was Buckingham’s prisoner, took advantage of his captor’s pride. He persuaded Buckingham not only to release him but also to rebel.

From ‘History of King Richard III’ by Thomas More, 1513. More later served on Henry VIII’s Privy Council and was close to the Tudors.

Source C

In this year many knights and gentlemen, of Kent and other places, banded themselves together. They joined with the Duke of Buckingham, being then at Brecon in Wales, who wanted to subdue King Richard; for rumours spread that the said King Richard had put to death the Lord Chamberlain and other gentlemen. And as before is said, he also put to death the children of King Edward, for which Richard lost the hearts of the people. And thereupon many gentlemen intended his destruction. And when the King knew of the Duke’s intent, he went westward; and there raised his people, whereupon the Duke fled, because at that time his people were not come to him. The day after, Buckingham was beheaded without speaking with King Richard. Then the gentlemen, who had intended to join with Buckingham, heard of his arrest and so they fled, sore and dismayed at what had occurred.

From ‘Fabian’s Chronicle’, published 1516. Fabian was an alderman in London at the time of the events described. He used a range of contemporary sources to write his Chronicle.

With reference to these sources and your understanding of the historical context, assess the value of these three sources to an historian studying Buckingham’s Rebellion.