Source A

Source A not reproduced here due to third-party copyright restrictions. Source A is from a declaration recorded in the parliamentary rolls. The source puts an emphasis on the illegality of the actions of the Lancastrians, with words such as ‘disobedience’ and ‘rebellion’.

From a declaration made in the parliamentary session of October to November 1460. This was recorded in the Parliamentary Roll, the official record of the English Parliament.

Source B

The lords with the Queen must not be arrogant because of the unimportant victory they won recently. We have seen and know that all the people are incensed and in the worst possible mood against those who do not desire peace. There are two reasons for this: firstly, the countless acts of cruelty attributed to those lords with the Queen, whereas these lords in London were not cruel, but welcoming. Secondly, whatever else the lords with the Queen claim, the people recognise that the King and the lords currently with him and us, are disposed to an honest and honourable peace. King Henry is not constrained against his free will, as some perverse persons falsely declare, but enjoys his full liberty. Access to him is open to all. This was not the case formerly. Accordingly, the lords with the Queen are to obey the King and believe us, who are labouring for peace and justice. Otherwise, we fear their ruin and destruction.

From a letter to a churchman accompanying Queen Margaret, by Francesco Coppini, the papal legate, 9 January 1461. Coppini wrote from London. Coppini had supported the Yorkists since 1460.

Source C

Richard of York was removed from this world at Wakefield. The northern men, aware that there was no one now who would resist them, swept onwards like a whirlwind from the north. In the impulse of their fury, they attempted to overrun the whole of England. Besides the vast amounts of property they collected, they also irreverently rushed, in their frantic rage, into churches, and wickedly plundered them. When priests sought to resist, the wretches cruelly slaughtered them in the churches. Thus, they spread out in vast crowds over a region of 30 miles without being challenged. They covered the whole surface of the earth like locusts, and made their way almost to the walls of London. Word came to us at Crowland that this abominable army had approached to within six miles of our boundaries. Fortunately, after adjoining counties had been given up to dreadful pillage, our abbey, by Divine Grace, was preserved. Therefore the Lord of Mercy raised up a defender, Edward, the illustrious Earl of March.

From the ‘Crowland Chronicle: First Continuation’, written by a well-educated but unnamed senior monk of Crowland Abbey in Lincolnshire before 1470.

With reference to these sources and your understanding of the historical context, assess the value of these three sources to an historian studying the position of the Lancastrians after the Battle of Northampton in 1460 and before Towton in 1461.